the year was
1948 around
750,000 Palestinians were expelled from
their land and the state of Israel came
into being the following year the UN
General Assembly created unoa the
refugee agency that works to offer basic
services to
Palestinians but Israel has long
objected to the UN
agency we have seen increased attacks on
the legitimacy of unur and we read that
has increased uh attempts to
delegitimize the category of Palestine
refugees altogether we see these attacks
as very politically
motivated Israel says the curriculums of
unra run schools encourage incitement
against Israel the UN agency denies that
Israel's prime minister Benjamin
Netanyahu has been calling for unra to
be dismantled for years unra regularly
is is uh accused of a set of recurrent
things the use of our premises by nonon
entities particularly by parties to a
conflict or were being accused of
complicity with parties to a conflict
but Israel's latest accusation has led
to at least 17 countries stopping their
funding to unra threatening the majority
of its budget and all on the word of
Israel that 12 unra staff in Gaza worked
with
Hamas unra carries out investigations
into every allegation and in this case
has requested proof from
Israel refugees say the funding
withdrawal will be devastating to the
5.9 million Palestinians un provides
services
for if un is lost so many things are
lost with it I won't be able to enroll
my children in school I won't be able to
take my children to the doctor or go to
the
pharmacy Ireland's foreign minister
thinks it's no coincidence that Israel's
allegation came on the same day as the
international court of justice ordered
Israeli forces to prevent acts of
genocide in Gaza and he links the
attacks on unoa to Israel's desire to
erase the historic claim of Palestinian
refugees and their right of return as
part of a wider um position around uh
the right of Return of refugees in the
context of the establishment of a
Palestinian State uh if we were to
arrive at a two-state Solutions uh
because the continuing of Contin
continuation of un is absolutely
essential for a Palestinian state to
emerge something that Israel's prime
minister Benyamin Netanyahu says he
cannot accept imin Kimber Al
jazer Chris gnis is a formera
spokesperson and joins us now from
London Mr gun it's good to have you on
the program we'll talk about sort of the
medical needs of of Gaz moment I just
wanted to ask I mean the effects of
occupation you know all too well I mean
is this case that's come to the icj in
the ha long time coming in your
opinion it's 56 years too long in the
coming but make no mistake this case is
hugely significant and indeed
unprecedented it's the first time in the
history of the UN that a quarter of the
UN member states have gone to the
highest judicial organ of the UN the icj
and demanded that the court make an
urgent DET termination that is to
declare the occupation doubly illegal
firstly it's illegal in its imposition
so the apartate system the colonial
Jewish settlements with three quarters
of a million illegal Jewish settlers
living on Stolen Palestinian land the
home demolitions the school demolitions
the torture of children in the middle of
the night the vicious settler violence
the blockade and now this plausible
genocide the list goes on but secondly a
quarter of the UN member states are
asking the court to say that the
occupation existentially in and of
itself is illegal because it denies the
Palestinians the right to
self-determination and Professor Philipe
Sans one of the legal councils for the
Palestinians made this clear that UN
member states must bring Israel's
occupation to an immediate and complete
end and let me quote him no Aid no
assistance no complicity no contribution
to forceable actions no money no arms no
trade no nothing so this was a major
milestone in Palestine advocacy because
the spotlight is not just on the illegal
practices of the Israeli Army the Seas
Etc it's now on the complicity in those
Crimes of the UN member states the US
the UK the EU they are now under the
spotlight and guess what the people on
the streets in the Arab world in the
global South in European in Western
capitals they are now going to be saying
to their governments if you want Putin
and Assad on the right side of
international law you got guys get a
better get on the right side too so a
major major Milestone okay in terms of
Milestones let's just focus in and put
the spotlight then onto Gaza I mean to
get your head around the issue of what
it means to live under occupation is
hard for the majority of us around the
world um you can to a certain extent uh
understand that because you've worked in
Gaza can you put just into a few words
uh what it's like for a person to feel
and to live under occupation and the
pressure that
creates well I had an email literally a
few hours ago from a colleague who i'
done an amazing project will with in
Gaza to help special needs children who
couldn't see properly who were partially
cited and he said that two nights ago
his eldest son who was about to qualify
to be a dentist died in a bomb which hit
the neighbor's house he has now been
displaced three or four times he's
living with his wife his four daughters
and his son they have lost absolutely
everything he says they go to bed hungry
the children go to bed crying because
they're so hungry they wake up hungry
they're buying water from illegal water
carts knowing that it's not clean they
all end up with diarrhea in Flats which
they're sharing with with 30 40 other
people it's that I hope that paints a
real a really humanized picture of what
it means to live in what the UN is
calling an
unprecedentedly barbaric attack that's
what it means today for an individual
that I know personally and that's one
among many I know that when you were in
position you always highlighted how
difficult it was to get Aid into Gaza or
the occupied West Bank I mean how
difficult or what were what were the
medical facilities like before October
the 7th to obviously what we're hearing
as we just heard from Dr Rick peppercorn
I mean how how devastated that the
medical um infrastructure is right now
how difficult was it trying to get
Medical Aid into
Gaza look even before the 7th of October
part of the Israeli strategy to impose a
collective punishment an illegal
Collective punishment on Gaza was to
Debbe the main hospitals of the medical
equipment and the medical supplies that
they needed so it was pretty much
impossible to get tertiary care for
cancer those sorts of of care absolutely
impossible and of course since um the
7th of October we hear of children
having amputations without anesthetic
women giving birth cesarian section
without anesthetic it has become utterly
barbaric and that is now on top of all
this we're seeing the slow Massacre the
starvation we're seeing people falling
ill we're seeing communicable diseases
we're seeing reports of people literally
dropping down of exhaustion on the
ground of hunger and exhaustion so you
know that is a port if you like of a
medical service which is not on its
knees it's been completely destroyed the
UN secret General has said that the
humanitarian response the humanitarian
system in Gaza is completely destroyed
and that's why I say what we need to do
is mobilize a massive International
effort it's no longer no longer we can
no longer leave the protection of
Palestinians health education food water
electricity all these things in the
hands of the Israelis they're committing
what the icj is calling a aible genocide
we need to get a presidential order
frankly signed by Joe Biden to get as he
did with Haiti in 2010 20,000 American
soldiers on the ground we need to see a
floating Hospital off the coast of Gaza
we need to see helicopters fing the
wounded the sick the dying backwards and
forwards because at the moment let me
tell you this safe area in Al maazi that
is no place for people there are no
toilet facilities there are no medical
facilities that is a recipe for further
destruction that is a recipe for further
plausible genocide when this attack
comes in Rafa which it will do within a
matter of weeks the world will have
blood on its hands if we don't see a
rapid massive Global humanitarian
mobilization now and mark my words
unless that happens we are going to see
industrial scale loss of human life but
the the world cannot say it has not been
warned
Chris gunness you uh paint a very Grim
picture for us and certainly one that I
think our viewers will be mulling over
in the coming hours thanks so much for
joining us from London thank you
pleasure pleasure